[RFC] Select cluster execution when triggering an execution (#4956)
flyteorg/flyte: rfc/core language/4956-cluster-pools.md

# [RFC] Select cluster execution when triggering an execution

**Authors:**

- @RRap0so
- @andresgomezfrr

## 1 Executive Summary

When triggering a Flyte LaunchPlan, Workflow or Task, Flyte permits the user to define a ClusterPool from a predefined list of pools that are set in the FlyteAdmin configuration. For example with `flytectl create execution
--clusterPool string` 

This provides greater flexibility compared to the existing feature where an [Execution Cluster Label](https://docs.flyte.org/en/latest/deployment/deployment/multicluster.html#configure-execution-cluster-labels) can be set at the Project/Domain level.

## 2 Motivation

The primary motivation for this proposal is to select the clusters where an execution is to be performed dynamically at execution time, without the constant need to overwrite the Execution Cluster Label.

Additionally, we would like to have the possibility of different executions targeting different clusters, even if they are published under the same Project/Domain. This is not entirely feasible using the current Execution Cluster Label.

## 3 Proposed Implementation

> We plan to use the `cluster_assignement` field (refer to [proto](https://github.com/flyteorg/flyte/blob/master/flyteidl/protos/flyteidl/admin/execution.proto#L312)) in each execution, this is a ClusterAssignment object with a `cluster_pool_name` which would be the field that contains a string with the corresponding ClusterPool ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We plan to use the `cluster_assignement` field (refer to [proto](https://github.com/flyteorg/flyte/blob/a2a63eb893bdff3c2d1a01242d0d25b73f287b1f/flyteidl/protos/flyteidl/admin/execution.proto#L315)) in each execution, this is a ClusterAssignment object with a `cluster_pool_name` which would be the field that contains a string with the corresponding ClusterPool ID.
```

In the FlyteAdmin configuration we have a list of `clusterpool_config` with all the different available pools and corresponding clusters.

**Note**: Today there are configurations to assign domains to specific pools, see [PR](https://github.com/flyteorg/flyte/pull/4208) and `cluster_pool` [interface](https://github.com/flyteorg/flyte/blob/962d45827646f106265630a0fb1d9ae74968bc32/flyteadmin/pkg/runtime/interfaces/cluster_pools.go). We propose another configuration to assign Clusters to a clusterPoolName by having another map under cluster object with weights and cluster assignments.

Proposed configuration:
```

>     clusters:

Reviewer: As said in the contributors' sync:

Love the proposal, my only wish would be to figure out whether there is a way to simplify this config here by not having to configure a cluster twice, once for the existing project/domain mechanism, once for the new mechanism. Would be nice if the cluster configuration could be shared.

Author: @fg91 I think it should be possible by expanding the `ExecutionParameters` struct. By adding the `ExecutionClusterLabel` to this [struct](https://github.com/flyteorg/flyte/blob/a2a63eb893bdff3c2d1a01242d0d25b73f287b1f/flyteadmin/pkg/workflowengine/interfaces/executor.go#L20) and making sure we pass it when executing it should make things simpler and avoid having double configs.

This will mean a bit of re-writing, since it's late I'll also cross-check my thinking and get back with some certainties next week.

**If no clusterPool is defined**: No change in current behavior.

**If clusterPool is defined**: Then we will add the poolName into the [ExecutionTargetSpec](https://github.com/flyteorg/flyte/blob/master/flyteadmin/pkg/executioncluster/execution_target.go#L13-L20) (we will need to modify the struct). This is passed to the getTarget where we check if it has a poolName defined and get the value from the poolWeightedRandomMap. There are still open questions regarding the priority of labels / pool names.

## 4 Metrics & Dashboards

If implemented correctly, we should be able to capture where executions are being triggered. This would be extra useful for our use case to make sure we’re routing executions to the correct pool of clusters

## 5 Drawbacks

Other than the usual drawbacks of implementing a new feature (the introduction of new bugs/problems) we don’t see any potential drawbacks with this implementation. The fields are already exposed but they are only missing the implementation. 

We don’t expect any additional overhead for execution or impact in terms of API for flyteadmin.

## 6 Alternatives

> As mentioned above, the only alternative we have implemented today is using the [Execution Cluster Labels](https://docs.flyte.org/en/latest/deployment/deployment/multicluster.html#configure-execution-cluster-labels). Even though we could make this work for our use case it’s not ideal and can bring further problems when we want to route executions to different clusters from the same Project/Domain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As mentioned above, the only alternative we have implemented today is using the [Execution Cluster Labels](https://docs.flyte.org/en/latest/deployment/deployment/multicluster.html#configure-execution-cluster-labels). This can bring further problems when we want to route executions to different clusters from the same Project/Domain.
```

## 7 Potential Impact and Dependencies

We do not see any.

## 8 Unresolved questions

> What takes priority Labels or Pools? 

Reviewer 3: I would vote for labels to take priority as those seem to be more execution specific. I might be missing something though

Reviewer 2: I think since pools are specified dynamically at execution time I think they should override labels as that is set more "statically"?

Author: Yes the label usage seems more related to  "I need this X type of cluster for this <PROJECT/Domain>".

So to be sure, we first check if there's a label set, then under the clusters in that label if there's a pool. If not then default using the weight. (Similar to what is done today.)
